Adding the Build-VM setup to Development.md (#2191)
pixie-io/pixie: DEVELOPMENT.md

## Setting up the Environment

Decide first if you'd like a full buildsystem (on a VM) or a containerized dev environment.

### VM as buildsystem
Uses a Ubuntu 24.04 as base to run `chef` to setup all dependencies.
The initial compilation is CPU intense and `16vcpu` are recommended.
This was tested on GCP: a balanced disk of 500 GB and a VM type that supports nested virtualization should be chosen, as of writing (May 2025)
`n2-standard-16` works well. 

> [!Warning]
>  The first build takes several hours and at least 160 Gb of space

Turn on nested virtualization and avoid the use of `spot` VMs for the first build to avoid the very long first

> build interrupting. If you create the VMs as templates from an image, you can later switch to more cost-effective `spot` instances.

Reviewer: Can we specify that nested virtualization is only needed if you intend to develop against Minikube?

Also I think the details about spot instances is a little niche as it's possible that people are running non cloud VMs. Could we remove those details?

Author: I removed and added explanation

```yaml
advancedMachineFeatures:
  enableNestedVirtualization: true
```

1) Install chef and some dependencies
 
```

> sudo apt update sudo apt install -y git coreutils mkcert libnss3-tools screen libvirt-daemon-system libvirt-clients qemu-kvm virt-manager

Author: I m moving that into 'chef', but we need to retest, so left a comment for now so ppl can install it manually. Most of the dependencies were for minikube, mkcert and coreutils were for running the vanilla pixie install (in a later step).

You re absolutely correct about screen: I separated out the tmux/screen install, as it is indeed a personal preference, but annoying if you forget it (IMO).

curl -L https://chefdownload-community.chef.io/install.sh | sudo bash
```
Now, on this VM, clone pixie (or your fork of it)

```
git clone https://github.com/pixie-io/pixie.git
cd pixie/tools/chef
sudo chef-solo -c solo.rb -j node_workstation.json
sudo usermod -aG libvirt $USER
```

Make permanent the env loading via your bashrc
```sh
echo "source /opt/px_dev/pxenv.inc " >> ~/.bashrc
```

Put the baselrc into your homedir:
```sh
cp .bazelrc ~/.
```
In order to very significantly speed up your work, you may opt for a local cache directory. This can be shared between users of the VM, if both are part of the same group.
Create a cache dir under <directory-path> like /tmp/bazel
```sh
sudo groupadd bazelcache
sudo usermod -aG bazelcache $USER
sudo mkdir -p <directory-path>
sudo chown :bazelcache <directory-path>
sudo chmod 2775 <directory-path>
```

2) Create/Use a registry you control and login
   
```sh
docker login ghcr.io/<myregistry>
```

> 3) Make Minikube run and deploy a vanilla pixie

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3) Prepare your Kubernetes cluster and deploy an existing Pixie release
```

Could we adjust the wording to emphasize that development can be done against any Kubernetes cluster? That way, users with an existing cluster won’t feel the need to set up an additional one.

Maybe something like this:

> If you have an existing kubernetes cluster to develop against, ensure your kubectl config is set properly. Otherwise, you can create a minikube cluster .... (existing instructions here).

Author: Very good point, yes. will add. 

From a maintainer PoV: wouldnt you want ppl to use a golden path, though? To limit the range of potential issues?

Author: I added the destinction in two WARNING boxes

If you added your user to the libvirt group (`sudo usermod -aG libvirt $USER`), this will now work (if you did this interactively: you need to refresh your group membership, e.g. by logout/login)
```sh
make dev-env-start
```
Deploy vanilla pixie (remote cloud)
```sh
sudo bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://getcosmic.ai/install.sh)"
export PX_CLOUD_ADDR=getcosmic.ai
px auth
px deploy -p=1Gi
```

> For reference and further information https://docs.px.dev/installing-pixie/install-guides/hosted-pixie/cosmic-cloud

Reviewer: Can we link to the documentation at https://docs.px.dev/installing-pixie/install-schemes/cli/ instead? Since our docs website is in a [separate repository](https://github.com/pixie-io/docs.px.dev), I worry that this could be missed if/when we make changes to our documentation.

In my opinion the important part to capture is that it requires deploying the Vizier first before a custom build can be deployed. I was thinking something along these lines:

> Before a custom build of Pixie can be deployed, you must install Pixie to your Kubernetes cluster first. Follow the steps [here](https://docs.px.dev/installing-pixie/install-schemes/cli/) and ensure Pixie is fully working before proceeding.

Author: This should now be addressed and vendor neutral

## Setting up the Environment

Decide first if you'd like a full buildsystem (on a VM) or a containerized dev environment.

### VM as buildsystem

This utilizes `chef` to setup all dependencies and is based on `ubuntu`. The VM type must support nested virtualization for `minikube` to work.

> The following specifics were tested on GCP on a Ubuntu 24.04 (May 2025): The initial compilation is CPU intense and `16vcpu` were a good trade-off, a balanced disk of 500 GB seems convienent and overall `n2-standard-16` works well. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following specifics were tested on GCP on a Ubuntu 24.04 (May 2025). Please see the latest [packer file](https://github.com/pixie-io/pixie/blob/main/tools/chef/Makefile#L56) for the current supported Ubuntu version: The initial compilation is CPU intense and `16vcpu` were a good trade-off, a balanced disk of 500 GB seems convenient and overall `n2-standard-16` works well. 
```

People often ask what OS to build their development environment on, so I added a slight modification to link to the current Ubuntu base image. Also fixed a misspelling.

cd pixie/tools/chef
sudo chef-solo -c solo.rb -j node_workstation.json
sudo usermod -aG libvirt $USER
```

Make permanent the env loading via your bashrc
```sh
echo "source /opt/px_dev/pxenv.inc " >> ~/.bashrc
```

2) If using Cache, tell bazel about it

   
Edit the `<directory-path>` into the .bazelrc and put it into your homedir:
```
# Global bazelrc file, see https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/guide.html#bazelrc.

# Use local Cache directory if building on a VM:
# On Chef VM, create a directory and comment in the following line:
 build --disk_cache=/tmp/bazel/ # Optional for multi-user cache: Make this directory owned by a group name e.g. "bazelcache"
```

```sh
cp .bazelrc ~/.
```

3) Create/Use a registry you control and login
   
```sh
docker login ghcr.io/<myregistry>
```

4) Make Minikube run and deploy a vanilla pixie

If you added your user to the libvirt group (`sudo usermod -aG libvirt $USER`), starting the development environment on this VM will now work (if you did this interactively: you need to refresh your group membership, e.g. by logout/login). The following command will, amongst other things, start minikube
```sh
make dev-env-start
```

> Onto this minikube, we first deploy the upstream pixie (`vizier`, `kelvin` and `pem`) using the remote cloud  `export PX_CLOUD_ADDR=getcosmic.ai` . Follow https://docs.px.dev/installing-pixie/install-schemes/cli , to install the  `px` command line interface and login:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Onto this minikube, we first deploy the upstream pixie (`vizier`, `kelvin` and `pem`) using the hosted cloud. Follow [these instructions](https://docs.px.dev/installing-pixie/install-schemes/cli) to install the `px` command line interface and Pixie:
```

We refer to the Cosmic and New Relic clouds as "hosted". This suggestion keeps the terminology consistent with the rest of our docs. I also wanted to avoid any reference to any specific cloud. Our docs are supposed to be 'vendor neutral' and the linked documentation is set up according to the CNCF guidelines.

Author: Suggestion was applied

```sh
px auth login
```

Once logged in to pixie, we found that limiting the memory is useful, thus after login, set the deploy option like so:
```sh
px deploy -p=1Gi
```
For reference and further information https://docs.px.dev/installing-pixie/install-guides/hosted-pixie/cosmic-cloud.

> You may encounter the following WARNING, which is related to the kernel headers missing on the minikube node (this is not your VM node). Usually, for development purposes this is safe to ignore. Please see [pixie-issue2051](https://github.com/pixie-io/pixie/issues/2051) for further details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may encounter the following WARNING, which is related to the kernel headers missing on the minikube node (this is not your VM node). This is safe to ignore if Pixie starts up properly and your cluster is queryable from Pixie's [Live UI](https://docs.px.dev/using-pixie/using-live-ui). Please see [pixie-issue2051](https://github.com/pixie-io/pixie/issues/2051) for further details.
```

The kernel header issue can affect development and "real" clusters. This suggestion modifies the wording slightly to provide a hint at what to look for to give people confidence that their cluster is working properly.

px deploy -p=1Gi
```
For reference and further information https://docs.px.dev/installing-pixie/install-guides/hosted-pixie/cosmic-cloud.

Optional on `minikube`:

You may encounter the following WARNING, which is related to the kernel headers missing on the minikube node (this is not your VM node). This is safe to ignore if Pixie starts up properly and your cluster is queryable from Pixie's [Live UI](https://docs.px.dev/using-pixie/using-live-ui). Please see [pixie-issue2051](https://github.com/pixie-io/pixie/issues/2051) for further details.
```
ERR: Detected missing kernel headers on your cluster's nodes. This may cause issues with the Pixie agent. Please install kernel headers on all nodes.
```

#### 6) Skaffold deploy your changes

Once you make changes to the source code, or switch to another source code version, use Skaffold to deploy (after you have the vanilla setup working on minikube)

Ensure that you have commented in the bazelcache-directory into the bazel config (see Step 2).

Review the compilation-mode suits your purposes:
```
cat skaffold/skaffold_vizier.yaml
# Note: You will want to stick with a sysroot based build (-p x86_64_sysroot or -p aarch64_sysroot),

> # but you may want to change the --complication_mode setting based on your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# but you may want to change the --compilation_mode setting based on your needs.
```
